In Northridge family, how are you?
You doing well?
So good to be back with you.
Man, I've got to tell you that I have so enjoyed the series that we have been a part of as a church family called What If It's True.
I remember when Pastor Brad was telling me about the series and
graciously inviting me to be a part of it for a couple of different gatherings.
And as he was telling me this, the premise that if we really do believe some of these things, right, that these tenets of our faith, and we really do believe some of these foundational truths of our faith to be true, they need to be able to play out right in the trenches of our every day.
And when he was telling me about it, I distinctively have this memory of hearing him, I had him on speakerphone on my phone in my front porch,
And I was watching my dog run around, you know, and I was listening to Pastor Brad.
And instantly, this one episode of a podcast that I listened to came to mind.
And in real time, I said, hey, Pastor Brad, I gotta tell you, since we're gonna kick off the series, let me give you a nugget.
I gotta tell you that we're gonna, there's an episode I remember in this podcast called This American Life.
about 3 million people a week listen to this American life, NPR's This American Life.
And I said, hey, this one episode is about something that I think you would really do well to kick off the series by telling the story of.
And I told them the story and I butchered it.
And when I got done telling the story, and it's not because of the story not being good.
I'm telling you, typically about 3 million people a week listen to this podcast.
And this is the number one most listened to episode of that podcast.
They estimate about 75 million people have listened to this podcast.
It's one of the top 10 podcast episodes of all time in any podcast, including Joe Rogan, including The New York Times Daily and all that stuff.
So I'm just telling you that.
So I tell Pastor Brad the story and when I got done with it, he's so gracious to me.
He's so kind to me.
He goes, I can't wait for you to tell that story as if to say, not my standards, but it'll do for you.
All right.
I want to butcher the story, but I want to tell you the story because I think it does frame well the series that we're in.
The episode is about this super.
And so what they do in this American life is they'll take a slice of American life.
So they'll do like in three acts and three stories, something about beekeeping or about monster trucks or whatever they tend to have as a topic for the moment.
And this one episode, it was about three super episodes, meaning supers in an apartment complex or in a housing development.
And the reason it's so popular, this one episode is because of the story I'm about to tell you, this guy says that one day his super in him had a conversation.
And as he was talking to his super, his super had just gone through cancer and had just beaten it and everything.
And his super told him that he had recently invested in at the ground floor of an opportunity that he felt was about to like pay huge dividends.
His super told him, the tenant that recently, about a few months back, he had met this lady and that this lady had become his friend and that she had told him about something that she had bought into and that out of her kindness, knowing that he was going through a tough season as a guy who was struggling with cancer, that she wanted him to be blessed and was gonna invite him in as well.
And so then the super says to the tenant,
And I think I can get you in if you've got about 25, 30 grand.
And so you can like really, really benefit from what's about to come down the shoot.
So the story's unfolding and that Ira Glass who hosts the podcast asked the statement.
He goes, well, what was the thing that they wanted you to invest in?
And he says, well, my super said that he met this lady and this lady said to him, hey, these group of investors that I'm a part of, we have discovered this snowman.
in the North Pole, and what's unique about this snowman is that this snowman can bench press 400 pounds.
He's a bench pressing snowman.
And what we're gonna do with him is we are going to take him around the world.
People are gonna do a variety show and he's gonna headline the variety show.
And people from all over the world are gonna come together.
So like when they'll come to Detroit, right?
We're gonna book out a passive, you know, like an arena.
And people are gonna bring their families.
And people are gonna bring their, they're gonna get tickets on StubHub.
They're gonna pay overpriced, you know, for them just to get in there.
And they're gonna get to see the snowman bench press
400 pounds.
And so the guy telling the story says, and so I have so many questions.
So you mean a guy that's dressed like a snowman?
And he's like, no, no, no, no.
It's an actual snowman that they've discovered.
And they're partnering with the snowman.
And the investment is this.
You can buy regional rights to benefit financially for when the snowman comes to town for these shows.
And so the lady who's selling this to the super says, I've already secured Florida.
And then the tenant says, and the superintendents, and the super, and now I, I put 30 grand in and I own Indonesia's rights.
And if you want in, he says to the tenant, I can get you in as well.
And so the guy telling the story, he goes like, I just have so many questions.
So it's a real snowman.
They're like, yeah, it's a real snowman.
He's like, so, so like,
When you own the rights to Florida, does it melt when you get to Florida?
And you're talking about the real, now how did the snowman come about?
Did the snowman make himself?
Did he just roll himself up into a ball?
And then like, what does he look like?
Well, does he have eyes?
That's how does he see, you know, like what to hold on to the bench press?
And he goes, no, no, no, I've seen a picture.
Like the eyes are made of cold, the nose is made of a carrot.
You got the top hat.
He's like the order of the top hat from Amazon.
There's Amazon delivered it up part of the North Pole.
I mean, like you're telling me that an actual snowman is bench pressing.
And as they're telling this, it's just so ridiculous, right?
It's just so preposterous.
And so like, he's telling the story and then he finally gets to him and he says, and so let's say I believe it's a real snowman that is like bench, let's say all that's true.
So if all of this true, what we're gonna do with this snowman that we've
like we've discovered that's alive, like walking around, gonna come to Detroit, after Detroit's gonna go to Cleveland, after Cleveland's gonna go to Chicago, he's gonna get on a pre-voe bus and tour the country, right?
He's gonna be on private jet with his entourage and snowman it out.
What we've decided to do with this snowman is we've decided to put him in front of people at a variety show.
I think he's gonna be busy talking to every scientist that ever lived.
Because everything we know in science will have to be rebooted if this is true.
He said, I think he's going to be busy talking to every theologian that's alive.
Every theologian is going to have to come and sit with him and go, hey, this is not in the Quran, you know?
And this is not like you have a soul, like Christians are gonna go, God so loved every snowman.
And this is the one we discovered.
Does this mean there's a whole bunch of snowmen that we don't know?
I mean, like this white walker thing is actually happening, you know, and not fiction is real.
And as he's saying this, the reason that this is such good storytelling and become something that 75 million people download is just the core of it is that people are buying stock, people are investing in
something as silly as, I believe it's true, there is a bench lifting snowman.
Now I say that to say, to a unbelieving world, now I'm pivoting here, to a Christian world, we like to call ourselves believers, believers.
And so when Pastor Brad came up and said, I believe the Bible is not just a suggestion book,
Right?
I believe the Bible is the inerrant word of God for the people of God.
That was like week one of if it's true, if the Bible really is what the Bible claims to be, the word of God for the people of God, right?
For the trenches of God.
I believe that Jesus was the Son of God.
I believe that He lived the perfect life.
The next week He said, I believe He died.
Then what?
On Easter, Pastor Brad preached, I believe He rose from the grave.
He conquered the grave.
I just want you to know that to a lost world.
I want you to know to an unbelieving world.
It is just a silly to them that we would believe in a bench pressing snowman as it is for us to say we believe in a cross dying savior.
And they think you have invested, you've bought in stock, you've put yourself into something that you believe that I just think is a fairy tale because maybe you're just afraid of what's on the other side of the grave and you've told yourself some things to make yourself feel good.
And you concocted this idea of heaven and savior and all of these things just to make the math work out for you and your mind.
So do you realize what I'm saying to you?
To a lost world looking at what we believe just seems silly.
And it's almost like living by the airport, or if you live by the airport, you quit hearing the plane.
I think we hear, I believe it's true.
I believe it's true that Jesus is the Son of God.
Anybody with me on that one?
I believe it's true.
Can I just tell you?
The lost world out there, the unbelieving world out there thinks that's silly.
That a Jewish carpenter 2,000 years ago born in a manger.
I mean, we're so close to the airport, we don't hear the sound.
We're so close to the church.
These songs that we sing, this theology that we celebrate, to a lost world they go, that guy born, born in that part of the world is the savior of everyone who's here.
That guy is the one and in the way God planned out all that out, our salvation, forget bench pressing.
Jesus died on a cross and his blood covers my sin today.
And then he rose from the grave.
Do you see what I mean when I say we believe it to be true?
Anybody with me this?
I'll go back and say from week one of Pastor Brad's series, if God's word says it, I believe it.
Anybody with me on this?
So we believe it's true, and if we believe it's true, and they don't believe it's true, then we disagree on what we believe to be true, but we don't just buy stock into it.
We put all our life behind it.
We bring our entire self behind it, not just our wallet, but everything that we are, and we bring it in and we go, we believe it's true.
And if it's true, then doesn't that ultimately change everything?
If it's actually true that there is a snowman that ventures 400 pounds, that changes everything.
No duh.
But if it's actually true that Jesus is Lord, that changes everything.
Does that make sense?
So this is more than just something we tell ourselves, it's true.
Whether we believe it or not, it's true.
And what happens is we look at God's word and sometimes we go, well, I'm not gonna get aggressively weird about it.
I believe it's true until we discount it and go, well, it's true, but maybe it's true for you, but it's not true for me.
And the verse I'm gonna read today is so often the verse we're gonna look at this morning from God's word that I believe to be true is so often discounted because people think, well, that was true for them and the circumstances of their life, but it's not true for me or
or people believe it's true, and then they misuse it.
This is not just one of the top 10 most taken out of context scriptures that we're about to read here, all right?
This makes the top 10 list on that.
This is the reigning number one, King of the Hill of the most prescribed Bible verse out of 31,000 scripture passages in the Bible.
This is the one people prescribe more than any other in every circumstance that they can get their whole love in their life.
Like right now, we're in graduation season.
This will be the most written in a graduation card, Bible verse, during graduation season.
People will prescribe, they will prescribe this verse, all right?
The people that are graduating, and they'll take the exact same verse, and they'll prescribe it to someone who thought they were graduating, but now it's gonna have to go to summer school to graduate.
They're gonna go, congratulations, Jeremiah 2911.
And they're gonna go, sorry you didn't graduate.
Jeremiah 2911.
They're going to go, happy birthday.
They're going to go, oh, sad that your father died.
Jeremiah 2911.
Oh, wow, you got the job.
Amazing.
So excited for you.
You got the promotion.
Jeremiah 2911.
And then, oh, man, bro, I'm so bummed that you got looked over and you didn't get the job.
And people love to prescribe Jeremiah 2911 because we believe it to be true.
But just because it's true, and we believe it to be true, doesn't mean that we wanna abuse it.
And so to maximize its truth, to make sure that we really utilize it the way God intended, we're gonna study it today to get it in this right context so that we don't ignore it or that we don't misuse it.
Does that make sense?
Now how many of you know, Jeremiah 29, 11, by heart?
If you don't, let's just read it together.
And so we'll look at the text and then we'll look at the context of the text and then
see how this applies to our lives since it truly is the word of God for the people of God in the trenches and the circumstances of their everyday life.
Jeremiah 29, 11.
God says, for I know, for I know, let's just stop right there.
Look at me just for a second.
Do you believe it's true that God knows?
Do you believe it's true that has it ever occurred to you that nothing ever occurs to God?
That God knows.
Nothing is a surprise to God.
Things happened this week that were a surprise to you.
You were like, oh, I didn't know they were gonna get teary on Arnold as the first draft pick.
God knew before we picked him.
God knows who's gonna beat the lions or who's not gonna beat the lions.
You know, well, we're all praying that they don't get beat at all, right?
They'll go all the way to Super Bowl undefeated, but God knows the score.
God knows it.
How many people believe God knows?
I know he means it, I believe it to be true.
Can't you say this?
You don't know.
Not just about the lions, you don't know about you.
You think you know about you.
I think I know about me.
I think right now I'm in a really, really clarified season of my life.
My wife is here, she can tell you we're in the season of rest and I just feel like I'm clear.
The fog is just like I'm just clear.
I feel like I know where my kids are at when it comes to their walk with God.
I know where I'm going.
But can I just say, I think I know what's going on?
You think you know what's going on?
You have no idea.
Every single one of us right now, where we're heading, we think we're going, we are one text away.
One text.
This morning, I left the hotel and I came here and my wife said, I'll meet you, right?
Between the first service and second service, if I'd gotten a text from somebody that said, hey, David, your wife was just in an accident on the way from the hotel to here.
And buddy, you need to get to the hospital, but don't rush because she's passed away.
I'm one text away, God forbid, right?
Everything in my life turns upside down.
So we have this false sense
of thinking we know, but we don't know.
We are one lump away cancer.
We are one bat in a market in China or lab away from the economy shutting down and the business that you right now think is about to excel all of a sudden being sidelined for two and a half years.
Think about it.
We don't know.
But before we even go further in, how many of you believe this?
I don't have to know because I know the one who does.
God holds my life in my hands.
So God begins this whole thing by saying, I know.
For I know the plans I have for you.
Again, we're living by the airport and we quit hearing the planes.
We believe this, that the God of this universe, the most significant being of all time,
doesn't just know, he knows about you and me and he cares.
He knows about every hair on my body.
Less up here, more out here and more going out of my nose and ears these days.
But God knows about every single person here.
God knows and doesn't just know, he knows about every one of us.
God knows and he cares.
And here's what's amazing.
He doesn't just care about Michigan.
He cares about Ohio State fans.
That's the amazing grace of God.
That God would care about the Buckeye.
Amen?
And so God knows and he says, I know what's going on with you.
And here's what's going on.
And I know there's in the economy of the world, there's bigger things going on, like what's going on on the Gaza Strip or what's going on right now with this country or what's going on in Sudan.
I know.
I know what's going on in the same time with every single person, and I know your heart was broken on the way over here, because your children were kind of mean to you today, and I care about that.
I don't have bigger fish to fry.
If right now you're hurting, I know, and it's not insignificant.
If that doesn't give you value, nothing ever will.
And God says, I know the plans that I have for you that clears the Lord, and then He says,
Here's my plans, plans to prosper you and not to harm you, plans to give you hope and a future.
And so do you believe that to be true?
And so you don't get the job and you prescribe it and say, God knows that you weren't gonna get the job.
It's not a surprise to God.
God's not looking at his angels going, Gabriel, Michael, I didn't know Josh wasn't gonna get the job.
No one texted me on this one.
God knows even when we don't know.
And God says, I know that you've been waiting to have this baby.
I know that you continue to get the news that you're not pregnant.
I know that you've been waiting for this adoption to come through.
I know that you got looked, I know what's going on and I care.
I know the plans I have for you declares the Lord and my plans are to prosper you and not harm you.
And my plans are to give you a hope and a future.
Now what happens sometimes is we believe that.
Anybody with me, we believe that.
That's why we prescribe it.
You get the job, you prescribe it.
You don't get the job with anybody with me, we believe it.
But what happens is sometimes we believe it, but then we abuse it.
We believe it, but we misuse it.
Typically, where it's mostly misused is the health and wealth prosperity.
And I say gospel in quotes, because it's not the true gospel.
It's the false gospel.
where people will take Jeremiah 2911 and they believe it, they don't just believe it, they name it and claim it, and they name it and claim it this way.
I like to call it ATM theology, where God basically becomes an ATM, and then Jeremiah 2911 is like the secret code that gets the money out.
God becomes a vending machine, and then Jeremiah 2911 becomes the coins, the tokens we put in to get
out of the choices, so like we want a job, we want a promotion and we go, well God, you have plans to prosper, you have plans to promote, you have plans to give me hope and a peace.
And so the prosperity gospel says, put in the coin and typically a false prophet will tell you, hey, you sow $100, you're gonna get $10,000.
You want that Cadillac, sow some money, you'll get a Cadillac.
And what we do is we take Jeremiah 29.11 and we believe it, but we don't just believe it, we misuse it, because that's not what God is saying.
And that's why context matters.
See, when we treat God like a vending machine, when we treat God like, hey Jeremiah 29, 11, like I'm going to bring that before you, like you said, you know the plans for me.
And so give me that promotion or heal that cancer and let it go.
Health and wealth prosperity says all you got to do is name it and claim it.
And if you really believe it and don't have that, this is going to come through.
When we treat God like that, then who's actually God?
God becomes nothing but a waiter serving me.
And my definition of prosperity is a bigger wallet, but in the economy of God, let's talk about money since we're kind of using that illustration.
You do sow a seed, but typically, like if you decide today, I'm going to sow a seed in the life of a foster child.
Financially, I'm gonna sponsor a family to foster, or financially, I'm gonna give to a church to build this facility to help with the arts, the kingdom work, or whatever.
What happens is typically when you sow financial seed, so many times, false prophets tell you,
So with seed, get an escalate.
But that's not how God works.
God says salvation will spring up from the ground.
I'm going to prosper.
I'm going to profit.
I'm going to bless.
I'm going to increase.
But this ain't about your wallet getting fatter.
Sometimes it can be.
This is about the kingdom getting wider.
And so sometimes we take this and we believe it, but then we misuse it.
And what happens in that moment is God becomes the waiter.
He just becomes the God, we go, hey, you made this promise, do this for me.
And if we're gonna treat God like a waiter, we should at least type 17 to 18%, because that's what a waiter gets at your local Applebee's.
And God's not interested in being our waiter.
He's not our Lord and waiter.
He's our Lord and Savior, amen?
And so God says, I know the plans I have for you,
And my definition of prosperity, my definition of prosperity is the definition you need to own because what is best for me is what's ultimately best for you.
The other thing that people sometimes do is they hear this and they don't just, but they go, well, it's not really for me.
Like people believe it.
They go, Jeremiah 29 is 11 is true, but they go, well, that's a, that has historical significance because that was for a group of people in a particular
That wasn't even a promise, if you know the context, to a person.
It was to a nation.
And so they think, well, this was a particular moment to a particular people group in a particular situation, and God gives that to them.
God prescribes that to them.
But today, 3,000 years later, it doesn't apply to us.
But the reality is, it's not just that I believe it.
I can receive it.
I can lay claim to it if I lay claim to it accurately.
Because can I just say this to you?
If you believe, going back to one of our earlier weeks in the series, if you believe that Jesus died for you on the cross, and that through him, he who knew no sin became sin, so that you could become the righteous of God.
If you've ever received that, if you believe that, anybody here born again, saved by the blood of Jesus, amen, scattered, covered, smothered by the blood.
I just want to be clear and say this to you.
That was a particular promise to a particular people in a particular situation, but all the promises of God, including Jeremiah 29, 11, for those who are the children of God are a yes and amen.
And so we can lay claim to it as long as we lay claim to it accurately.
And so God's looking at us in this moment and he's going, this isn't about like your betterment, front load, as much as kingdom betterment, which is ultimately your betterment that you trust me.
See, the backstory is so important in this one, in believing it and then receiving it accurately.
What happened was, the backstory on this is that the people of God, the Israelites were very disobedient.
And in a season of rebellious disobedience to God, God decided, because He loves them so much, to let the consequences of their disobedience play out.
Because every parent in this room knows what I'm talking about.
When you let
Your children's bad behavior becomes something that the consequences of.
They associate disobedience with pain.
That's actually not punishing your children.
That's disciplining your children.
Anybody with me on that?
Some of you all aren't like that.
Some of you all, if you were to be really honest, right now you just kind of bode up emotionally.
You're like, oh, is he talking about the pancake?
Because we don't spank.
We want them to discover.
themselves.
And so we don't really, we don't really, we don't really discipline our children.
Like we don't want to cause early trauma by saying no.
You know, like no is a powerful emotional bat on the head.
And so we don't do that.
We don't physically, but we certainly don't emotionally.
And I'm not telling you to beat your kids.
I'm just telling you, everybody in this room knows if you don't, if you don't associate, if your children don't associate this obedience with consequences, you're raising little meme monsters.
Right?
You're raising little meme.
And we don't want to, we want to raise up children that go out.
So little Johnny is oompa-loompin with a fork in his hand towards the plug.
We don't need to just say no, if little Johnny's sticking the fork in the plug, we need to like, no.
I'd rather pop their hand and they not electrocute them.
That's not hurting them.
That's helping them.
That's why you can't even spell the word disciple ship without the word discipline in it.
And I know I just lost a few of you.
I'm about to get hashtag canceled, but I love you enough to tell you.
It's good parenting.
And I'm not telling you to spank.
I'm not telling you like, don't do time.
God will give you.
That's personal.
What I'm telling you is when you love someone, sometimes you gotta let them.
This sounds weird.
You gotta let them sit in their stink.
And you're there with them.
But you want them to understand, man, like when I made this choice,
It paid out.
It doesn't just hurt me.
It hurt others around me.
And you want to make them aware.
Does that make sense?
And so God loves them so much that they're disobedient, disobedient, disobedient.
And God says, you want to continue to take the wheel?
I'll let you.
And in their disobedience, God allows the Babylonians to come in and invade them.
And they invade, you know, Jerusalem.
And when they invade, the Israelites get taken over.
The Babylonians, King Nebuchadnezzar and Israelites, they come in and they invade.
And when they invade and they take over that nation, they go to war and they just basically take over that nation.
What they do is their same strategy that they did every time they'd go to somewhere to conquer the land.
They would go to that land and what they would do is they would cherry pick the leaders of that land and they would take them out of that place to cripple them and to decrease them.
So what they would do, this was their strategies, they would find all the influencers of a nation.
So they would take over a nation, and then they would take all the lawyers, and the doctors, and the brightest, and the best, and all that.
They would take all of them out, and they'd take them.
And so that's what they did.
They took 3,000 of the brightest in the finest, the leaders of that nation, and they brought them into exiles.
It was kind of like trafficking.
It was a prison of war, except not in Jerusalem.
They took them out to bring them into captivity, to bring them as exiles.
So these citizens are
brought into this citizenship, and they are in Babylon.
So the context is, the book of Jeremiah 29, 11 is, these 3,000 exiles are brought here out of captivity because of the consequences of their sin, and while they're there, God has ordained this moment, by the way.
He didn't just allow it.
Scripture says, these are my plans.
God allows them to be there, and as they're there, they don't want to be there.
They're hostages out of context.
They're by far the minorities, right?
They're by far exiles.
And while they're there in that moment, a false prophet comes and tells them what they want to hear.
Because that's what a false prophet will do.
A false prophet will pander to you.
They're not just pretty in the eyes.
They're pretty to the ear.
They'll tell you what you want to hear.
So the false prophet tells them, hey, you're going to be here just a really short time.
Don't worry about it.
Just bear up.
It'll be over soon.
But then the weeping prophet, Jeremiah,
Jeremiah 29, Jeremiah, sitting here, hears about the false prophecy, and then he tells them as God's spokesperson, the truth, because that's what a true prophet does.
He tells you what you need to hear, not what you want to hear.
Can I just stop right here and say, I'm so grateful that Pastor Brad Powell, when he speaks God's word, sometimes he knows it's not popular, but he's like, I'd rather tell him the truth.
And so many people are afraid to confront you with the truth.
He doesn't enjoy it.
He doesn't go, oh, this is so awesome.
I get to drop it like it's hot.
No, he's just like, I'm obedient to the text.
Can I ask you, like, if you got a lump and you're like, I wonder if it's a tumor and then they go and they do an MRI and they do some tests and they do some blood work.
And now you're sitting in the doctor's office and he's about to come in to tell you the results.
Do you want the doctor to tell you what you want to hear or what you need to hear?
There's nothing wrong with wanting it to be, hey, it's nothing.
It's nothing, right?
But you want that.
By the way, you should want that.
If you want it to be cancer, if you want it to be bad news, then you've switched one false gospel, which is the prosperity gospel, with another false gospel, which is the suffering gospel, the poverty gospel, just the gospel, the gospel.
Don't make an idol of prosperity and don't make an idol of poverty.
Make a God of the one true God, the gospel, amen?
The good news.
And so if you're there and the doctor comes in, how many do you say, I want the doctor to tell me the actual results, even though it might not be popular to my, and maybe you want the truth from a doctor?
Cool.
Why would God's standard be lower than a doctor's?
And so God in his love tells them the truth.
And so he gives them the truth.
He says, hey, through the prophet Isaiah, I mean, through the prophet Jeremiah, he sends a letter and he says, hey, you're not gonna be there for a short time.
you're gonna be there for 70 years.
70 years.
And one of the things I love about Northridge is it's such a diverse church, not just in ethnicity and not just in, this church is so diverse in age.
And I know it's landing very differently with different people when I say 70 years.
Can you put yourself in this moment?
You're an exile in a foreign land and a prophet says to you, you're gonna be there for 70 years.
There's a lot of you, those on TikTok, all right?
They're thinking like,
Oh, that just means like I'll spend the fourth quarter of my life back home.
But the most that he heard that and you're just like me, you're like, well, that'll be the rest of it.
And I think even my grandkids might be there for a while.
And so God gives them that news.
And he says, I have ordained for you not to go anywhere.
And then, and then if you go back a few verses, God says this to them.
He says, here's the plans.
And he actually shows them the plans.
Let's read verses.
Jeremiah, let's back up a minute and read verses
Jeremiah 5, 29, 5.
Very interesting.
He says, I've put you there as exiles, and here's what I want you to do.
I want you to build houses and settle down.
I want you to plant gardens and eat what they produce.
That takes a while.
Plant a lemon tree.
It takes a while to get a lemon from it.
I want you to marry and have sons and daughters.
I want you to find wives for your sons and give your daughters in marriage.
He's not telling them to marry
Then he wants them to be equally yoked, but he's saying, build roots.
Don't be a renter.
Go ahead and buy.
You're going to be here a while so that they too may have sons and daughters.
Increase in number there.
Do not decrease.
Also seek the peace and prosperity of the city to which I have carried.
I have carried you.
Does that make sense?
The God's going, hey, they treat you like hostile.
You treat them like hospitable.
Actually, literally, he says, pray, this on the back end of verse seven, pray to the Lord for them, for it, because if it prospers, you two will prosper.
So what God's saying to them is, hey, you're here and I have plans for you and I have put you here.
And in this moment that I put you in, I want you to understand that two things are going on.
Number one, you're here and you think you're in a penalty box, but I want you to understand, you're not just here in a penalty box moment, there's something much bigger going on.
I know you want to be removed from this moment.
Can we just say, like, they're right now, some of you are in a moment in your life where you are going through a hard time.
Cancer is there.
Restlessness is there.
You're in the middle of a divorce moment.
You're in the middle of a hard moment.
You're in the middle of being ridiculed at work for your faith moment.
Anybody here like right now you're in a valley?
And when we're in a valley, whatever is going on, whether it's sins we committed or sins that have been committed against us, right?
Sometimes we get in a valley and typically when we're in a valley, we want to be removed from the moment.
We're like, God, deliver me from this moment.
And so often, don't miss this if you're taking notes.
Don't miss this.
So often we want to be removed.
And God says, I don't want to remove you.
I want to refine you.
This isn't me punishing you.
This is me pruning you.
And I'm blessing you.
And I'm giving you peace.
despite your circumstances, not out of your circumstances.
I'm in that moment and listen, so often we wanna be removed and God's going, I don't wanna just use this moment as a refiner's moment in you, I wanna use this moment as a revival moment through you.
And God says, I want you to plant seeds and I want you to go there, but I want you to, here's the fancy spiritual word for it, I want you to be incarnational in Babylon.
And so, hey, the 3,000 of you that are here, do not kind of build your own like Israelite ghetto and rally to troops.
I want you to get in the mix.
Listen, listen, typically when we're the minorities in a world as Christians, the spirit of Babylon, maybe not the nation of that, but the spirit of Babylon, and we as kingdom citizens, right?
Citizens ultimately of the kingdom of God and the kingdom of man, typically when we're there, three C's, if you're taking notes, happen.
as an option, three postures.
We can get combative towards those people, or we can get conforming towards those people.
So we either pick a fight with them, it's us against them, or we conform, we become one of them, or what God is saying to them is like, I don't want you to be combative, or I don't want you to be actually conforming.
I want you to be in it, but not of it.
I want you to be compassionate.
And I want you to go there and I want you to be salt.
I want you to be light.
I want you to shine.
I want you actually not to see the very people that took you hostage and everybody else to stay.
I want you not just to see them as the enemy, but as the prize.
I want you to lead them towards me.
I have sent you here.
You think you're here as an exile, but you're really here as an ambassador.
You're on mission.
And I want you to shine.
They have sent you here to decrease, but I want you to increase.
Not your wallet, there's something so much bigger going on.
I want you to increase.
I want you to love people.
Have you ever thought about this in this text?
That when they get there, y'all, there's 3,000 of them that are there.
But it's like they get there and it's like they're not just 3,000 exiles and everybody else is a Babylonian.
The Babylonians would go out to different nations and concord nations and then they would bring their cream of the crop
So at that moment, there were exiles from Syria, exiles from all these other nations that were there among them.
It's kind of like Florida.
You know how nobody in Florida is from Florida?
When you go to Florida?
Because it's like tourists, like the Babylonians were actually the numeric minority of the place.
They were all, and God in His sovereignty is saying, what the enemy meant for evil, I'm using for good.
Everybody who's anybody of all those nations are there.
You don't even need a passport to go out and reach.
They're all there.
Now go be incarnational.
Go be bright.
Go be light.
Go and lead them towards Christ's likeness.
And what I'm telling you this morning and what I'm teaching you and I hope you know it's true is that God's ultimate plan for us is not just what we're teaching in this room.
They're teaching it down the hall.
Anybody got kids down the hall right now?
Anybody dropping your kids off?
Anybody with me?
You got kids cool.
Ma'am, you got your kid.
How old is your child that's down the hall?
An 11-year-old and a seven-year-old.
I just want to tell you something.
You didn't just drop them off for babysitting service.
They are teaching your kids stuff right now.
They are pickling your kids with stuff right now that they believe to be true and they believe that they should believe that.
I've been over there.
One time I was walking over there, my friend Wayne was giving me a tour and they were like using very, very strong tactics to like pickle your children's mind with things.
I just want to tell you, your kids, they're using this thing called songs.
Because songs, music lyrics have velcro effect to them.
And so they're using songs.
If you go in there on any given Sunday, they might be using powerful songs that just kind of get in the mix.
They're telling your kids to sing stuff like, I don't know, if you go right now, it might be like, this little light of mine, I'm gonna let it, this little light of mine, I'm gonna let it, this little light of mine, I'm gonna let it, let it, let it, hide it under a bushel.
They're teaching your kids, ma'am, to be a rebel.
They're teaching your kids this.
They're saying, hey, no light lives in you until the light of the world steps in you.
And when the light of the world steps in you, you can shine bright.
He who holds the light can shine bright.
He can reflect the radiance of God.
And so they're telling you're 11 year old.
You're not just an 11 year old.
You're a missionary in your school.
That's how you're seven year old.
You're a missionary on the playground.
So you're a missionary and you need to shine bright.
You need to be incarnational.
You need to be not of it, but in it.
But when you're there, you don't need to conform, but you need it with your convictions to be bright.
They're telling your kids to be bright, but they're not just telling your kids to be bright in there.
They're telling your kids, if the world tells you to let it dim, if the world tells you to put it under a bushel, you need to say,
And it's interesting, when they're seven, we tell them that.
But then when you're 50, you're like, I believe this, David, everything you just said, I believe.
And God just said, be bright, but then we go to work with our boss, and he invites us to play golf, and we go play golf with our boss.
And the boss is telling horrific jokes that are inappropriate about women.
And you feel like, well, if I don't laugh out loud at his joke, he might not give me the promotion at work.
And we hide it under a bushel.
Or hey, you know what, I've been a bridesmaid, a bridesmaid, a bridesmaid, a bridesmaid, a bridesmaid, and I'm ready to be a bride.
And if I'm gonna have someone finally give me a look and marry me, it just feels like when I get on these dating gaps, it's pretty obvious, I'm gonna have to hide it under a bushel.
And God's going, you are completing me.
You don't need a husband, you're completing me.
I know the plans I have for you.
I know those hideous overpriced dresses you bought once and now they're sitting in a closet.
Well, will you trust me?
I know that you think if I don't laugh at my boss's dirty joke that that's gonna, but what he's saying to you is I don't want you to be combative and I don't want you to conform, but I just want you not to laugh.
And if he deems it a conversation and on the back nine he goes, hey, you don't laugh at my jokes.
What's going on, you go, man, I think you are funny, but it's not everything you say.
I actually have a bigger boss.
And it's not funny to him.
So I kind of salute to him.
So since you ask, but hey, I still want to be around.
You're still a good boss.
I'm going to let it shine.
And what we do is we become adults and we let it dim and beloved.
God says, in carnational, you are an ambassador.
Do you trust me that in this moment, I know the plans I have for you.
It's the giving you hope and peace and prosperity because prosperity, ultimate prosperity when you're on your deathbed is not about the vacations you went on or how fancy your house was, how many square footage you had in your vacation home.
When you're laying there, you're going, did my life count in expanding, increasing the gospel?
And that's what God wants for you and me.
Can I get you to pray with us just wherever you are?
And with your heads bowed, can I just ask you a really simple question?
Maybe you're hearing this this morning, and as you're hearing it this morning, it's not just the Bible verse for you to hear for someone else.
Listen, the Bible is always, the Bible is always written not to you, but for you.
Like this was this letter that Jeremiah wrote.
He wrote to the exiles.
And none of us here are exiles living in Babylon where people living in Michigan.
And as we're here in this moment, that was not written directly to us, but because of the promises of God for the children of God, it's written for us.
And maybe today as you're hearing this, you're going, the season that I'm in, the season that I'm in, I'm not a bridesmaid waiting to be a bride or I'm not a
person who's going, everyone else is like celebrating baby showers and I'm just waiting and I just can't seem to get the good news.
My husband and I have been trying and trying or maybe you're going, David, I hear this today and actually for me it was conviction up.
I hide my faith under a bushel.
I let it dim because I just so often feel the power of the spirit of Babylon as a kingdom citizen.
And today I'm just
I'm convicted by that.
Or today, I've been standing my ground lovingly, compassionately, standing my ground.
And I've felt alone.
And today I realize I'm in the community of exiles.
I'm not alone.
And I feel encouraged by it.
But if this is for you today, in the balcony here in the front, like when I hear this passage today, it's not just for me.
It's right now, application to me.
It's like that old sentence.
You can believe in soap, but still be dirty.
You got to apply the soap.
Like today, I wanna lay claim to this promise, and that's where I'm at.
If that's you, wherever you are, I just wanna ask you to stand so that I can pray over you.
I would love just the honor of playing over you, man.
I think about the circumstances of my job or where I'm at in this cross-road moment or how I feel and where God's assigned me right now.
It felt like I've been in the penalty box, and I'm reminded today that God's not left me.
He's not abandoned me.
He's not forgotten me.
He's not punishing me.
He's pruning me.
He's working in the waiting.
Anybody else, just stand up.
Couples in this room that are going, we're in that season right now.
This is God's word.
I believe it.
I claim it rightly, dividing it rightly today.
I claim it in my life.
Anybody else?
Just rise up.
I just wanna pray over you.
Anybody else?
Do I have to stand to receive this?
You don't.
But there's something beautiful about, this is personal today, but it's not private.
I just wanna say, I'm in a season, I need this word today.
I believe this word to be true.
Despite my emotions, I don't feel like he's with me, but I believe he is.
Because my feelings are fickle.
I've done trusting my heart.
I want to trust his heart in this moment.
His words.
Anybody else?
Rise up.
This is for me right now in this moment.
You might be conviction.
God's convicting you that you've let it dim or God's convicting you the way you've maybe even
treated God like an ATM machine, or he might be comfort.
You've been obedient and God's going well done.
Stay at it.
Hold fast.
Encouraged.
Anybody else?
One last night, let's rise up.
And Lord, all these that are standing, you know, you know what's going on.
I have no idea what's happening to my left with my brother standing there.
And you do.
You know his future, you know his past, you know his thoughts, you know his inconsistencies, and you know his consistencies.
Lord, I don't know what this couple that are crying right here.
I don't know what's going on with them, but you do.
And you care.
Thank you that they're not alone.
Thank you, God, that you're for them.
You're with them.
You know that they're asking God healed.
They're asking God, deliver.
God, God, God, show up in a tremendous way.
I pray that today, in this moment, they would trust that God, you care.
You're there.
And so we pray God for intervention and trust and patience in saying, God, you know, and I trust you.
And so if you're not delivering me from this temporary affliction, use it to prune me and then to revive others through my testimony and witness.
If you're standing up, look at me for just a second.
I'm going to dismiss you.
And before I do, I want to say to those of you that are standing just real quick.
We got to get this kind of stuff right here, these moments where like, I just look around and I see grown men who are weeping right now.
I see grown, I see a couple, look at me.
This isn't, it's either like three Coldplay songs and a TED Talk or it's church, right?
And I hope you didn't get out of the rain and make it here just because you want to just a little pick me up.
You come available to the Lord and God speaks.
Now we got to get out of rose.
and get into circles.
What's beautiful is that the exiles had one another and that he's telling them to be fruitful, be multiple.
I want to say to you, when we dismiss here in just a second, our prayer team is going to be all up here in the front.
And some of you need to just walk down instead of like getting out of here and going, you need to walk down and just tell a prayer partner what's going on and get out of these rows and get into a circle and go, this is my name and this is what's going on with me and my wife, this is what's going on with my wife and they let them intercess and pray for you.
Because what will happen in that moment is they'll pray for you beyond this moment.
And next three weeks from now, three Sundays from now, they'll see you and go, man, did you get the job?
How's it going?
I've been wondering.
So walk in community and not in isolation in this moment, would you?
So that would be my admonition to you.
That would be my challenge to you that you find some accountability.
Can we get our prayer partners to come?
Just come on down.
Come on down, prayer partners and be available.
And the rest of us, let's stand with them.
In the balcony, listen, don't just make your way to the parking lot.
Like come, find intercession and prayer and accountability what God's saying, all right?
We're probably gonna need some of you who are leaders here.
You lead a community group or whatever just to come and be available as well, all right?
Prayer group leaders, I mean, prayer partners, if you'll come, right in campus, the same for you, all right?
All right, can we just, right now, just put your arms like this if you don't mind, just an imposter receiving
especially if you stood, because this is a really timely message for you in the season that you're in.
Remember, you sang it, now believe it.
He is for you.
And so may the Lord bless you, and may the Lord keep you, may the Lord shine His radiant face upon you, and be gracious to you.
Amen.
Hey, as we dismiss, come next week, Pastor Brad, I'll be back to start a brand new series and we'll have baptism and we'll also take the Lord's Supper.
So see you next week.
Come and receive.
God bless you.
We love you.
Come receive prayer.